Recipes
=======

A Buildout part is created by a recipe.  Recipes are always installed
as Python eggs.  They can be downloaded from a package server, such as
the Python Package Index, or they can be developed as part of a
project using a "develop" egg.

A develop egg is a special kind of egg that gets installed as an "egg
link" that contains the name of a source directory.  Develop eggs
don't have to be packaged for distribution to be used and can be
modified in place, which is especially useful while they are being
developed.

Let's create a recipe as part of the sample project.  We'll create a
recipe for creating directories.  First, we'll create a recipes source
directory for our local recipes::

    $ mkdir recipes

and then we'll create a source file for our mkdir recipe, mkdir.py::

 import logging, os, zc.buildout

 class Mkdir:

     def __init__(self, buildout, name, options):
         self.name, self.options = name, options
         options['path'] = os.path.join(
                               buildout['buildout']['directory'],
                               options['path'],
                               )
         if not os.path.isdir(os.path.dirname(options['path'])):
             logging.getLogger(self.name).error(
                 'Cannot create %s. %s is not a directory.',
                 options['path'], os.path.dirname(options['path']))
             raise zc.buildout.UserError('Invalid Path')


     def install(self):
         path = self.options['path']
         logging.getLogger(self.name).info(
             'Creating directory %s', os.path.basename(path))
         os.mkdir(path)
         return path

     def update(self):
         pass


Currently, recipes must define 3 methods:

  - a constructor,
  - an install method, and
  - an update method.

The constructor is responsible for updating a parts options to reflect
data read from other sections.  The buildout system keeps track of
whether a part specification has changed.  A part specification has
changed if it's options, after adjusting for data read from other
sections, has changed, or if the recipe has changed.  Only the options
for the part are considered.  If data are read from other sections,
then that information has to be reflected in the parts options.  In
the Mkdir example, the given path is interpreted relative to the
buildout directory, and data from the buildout directory is read.  The
path option is updated to reflect this.  If the directory option was
changed in the buildout sections, we would know to update parts
created using the mkdir recipe using relative path names.

When buildout is run, it saves configuration data for installed parts
in a file named ".installed.cfg".  In subsequent runs, it compares
part-configuration data stored in the .installed.cfg file and the
part-configuration data loaded from the configuration files as
modified by recipe constructors to decide if the configuration of a
part has changed.  If the configuration has changed, or if the recipe
has changed, then the part is uninstalled and reinstalled.  The
buildout only looks at the part's options, so any data used to
configure the part needs to be reflected in the part's options.  It is
the job of a recipe constructor to make sure that the options include
all relevant data.

Of course, parts are also uninstalled if they are no-longer used.

The recipe defines a constructor that takes a buildout object, a part
name, and an options dictionary.  It saves them in instance
attributes.  If the path is relative, we'll interpret it as relative
to the buildout directory.  The buildout object passed in is a mapping
from section name to a mapping of options for that section. The
buildout directory is available as the directory option of the
buildout section. We normalize the path and save it back into the
options directory.

The install method is responsible for creating the part.  In this
case, we need the path of the directory to create.  We'll use a path
option from our options dictionary.  The install method logs what it's
doing using the Python logging call.  We return the path that we
installed.  If the part is uninstalled or reinstalled, then the path
returned will be removed by the buildout machinery.  A recipe install
method is expected to return a string, or an iterable of strings
containing paths to be removed if a part is uninstalled.  For most
recipes, this is all of the uninstall support needed.  For more
complex uninstallation scenarios use Uninstall recipes.

The update method is responsible for updating an already installed
part.  An empty method is often provided, as in this example, if parts
can't be updated.  An update method can return None, a string, or an
iterable of strings. If a string or iterable of strings is returned,
then the saved list of paths to be uninstalled is updated with the new
information by adding any new files returned by the update method.

We need to provide packaging information so that our recipe can be
installed as a develop egg.  The minimum information we need to
specify is a name.  For recipes, we also need to define the names of
the recipe classes as entry points.  Packaging information is provided
via a setup.py script::

    >>> write(sample_buildout, 'recipes', 'setup.py',
    ... """
    ... from setuptools import setup
    ...
    ... setup(
    ...     name = "recipes",
    ...     entry_points = {'zc.buildout': ['mkdir = mkdir:Mkdir']},
    ...     )
    ... """)

Our setup script defines an entry point.  Entry points provide a way
for an egg to define the services it provides.  Here we've said that
we define a zc.buildout entry point named mkdir.  Recipe classes must
be exposed as entry points in the zc.buildout group.  we give entry
points names within the group.

We also need a README.txt for our recipes to avoid an annoying warning
from distutils, on which setuptools and zc.buildout are based::

    >>> write(sample_buildout, 'recipes', 'README.txt', " ")

Now let's update our buildout.cfg::

    >>> write(sample_buildout, 'buildout.cfg',
    ... """
    ... [buildout]
    ... develop = recipes
    ... parts = data-dir
    ...
    ... [data-dir]
    ... recipe = recipes:mkdir
    ... path = mystuff
    ... """)

Let's go through the changes one by one::

  develop = recipes

This tells the buildout to install a development egg for our recipes.
Any number of paths can be listed.  The paths can be relative or
absolute.  If relative, they are treated as relative to the buildout
directory.  They can be directory or file paths.  If a file path is
given, it should point to a Python setup script.  If a directory path
is given, it should point to a directory containing a setup.py file.
Development eggs are installed before building any parts, as they may
provide locally-defined recipes needed by the parts.

::

  parts = data-dir

Here we've named a part to be "built".  We can use any name we want
except that different part names must be unique and recipes will often
use the part name to decide what to do.

::

  [data-dir]
  recipe = recipes:mkdir
  path = mystuff

When we name a part, we also create a section of the same name that
contains part data.  In this section, we'll define the recipe to be
used to install the part.  In this case, we also specify the path to
be created.

Let's run the buildout.  We do so by running the build script in the
buildout::

    >>> import os
    >>> os.chdir(sample_buildout)
    >>> buildout = os.path.join(sample_buildout, 'bin', 'buildout')
    >>> print system(buildout),
    Develop: '/sample-buildout/recipes'
    Installing data-dir.
    data-dir: Creating directory mystuff

We see that the recipe created the directory, as expected::

    >>> ls(sample_buildout)
    -  .installed.cfg
    d  bin
    -  buildout.cfg
    d  develop-eggs
    d  eggs
    d  mystuff
    d  parts
    d  recipes

In addition, .installed.cfg has been created containing information
about the part we installed::

    >>> cat(sample_buildout, '.installed.cfg')
    [buildout]
    installed_develop_eggs = /sample-buildout/develop-eggs/recipes.egg-link
    parts = data-dir
    <BLANKLINE>
    [data-dir]
    __buildout_installed__ = /sample-buildout/mystuff
    __buildout_signature__ = recipes-c7vHV6ekIDUPy/7fjAaYjg==
    path = /sample-buildout/mystuff
    recipe = recipes:mkdir

Note that the directory we installed is included in .installed.cfg.
In addition, the path option includes the actual destination
directory.

If we change the name of the directory in the configuration file,
we'll see that the directory gets removed and recreated::

    >>> write(sample_buildout, 'buildout.cfg',
    ... """
    ... [buildout]
    ... develop = recipes
    ... parts = data-dir
    ...
    ... [data-dir]
    ... recipe = recipes:mkdir
    ... path = mydata
    ... """)

    >>> print system(buildout),
    Develop: '/sample-buildout/recipes'
    Uninstalling data-dir.
    Installing data-dir.
    data-dir: Creating directory mydata

    >>> ls(sample_buildout)
    -  .installed.cfg
    d  bin
    -  buildout.cfg
    d  develop-eggs
    d  eggs
    d  mydata
    d  parts
    d  recipes

If any of the files or directories created by a recipe are removed,
the part will be reinstalled::

    >>> rmdir(sample_buildout, 'mydata')
    >>> print system(buildout),
    Develop: '/sample-buildout/recipes'
    Uninstalling data-dir.
    Installing data-dir.
    data-dir: Creating directory mydata
